#+TITLE: 6 Lessons Learned On Starting A Business

* Discipline

As I write this, construction noises are raging on. The skyscraper next door
used to host quiet government offices, but got sold after COVID and has now been
under renovations 5 days a week, from 7AM to late afternoon, for the entire last
year. Now, it's all jackhammers, industrial compressors, heavy machinery, buck
hoists, and people shouting to communicate over all the noise. In short; not quiet.

I'm learning they have two more years to go. Fuck.

I put on earplugs. The noise goes right through. Fuck.

My work chair is still shaking from the noise. Fuck.

"Well, just relocate then!" my brain tells me. Wish I could afford doing this.

"Take your laptop and go work elsewhere!" it says now. Wish I had a laptop.

My bank account says I have less than nothing left. That can't be good.

This is perhaps the hardest lesson to learn. Circumstances are never going to be
perfect. You have to work with what you have, and how you feel, while finding a
way to perform to the best of your abilities.

I am often reminded of Alex Hormozi's words of wisdom, "this is what hard feels
like," in times like this. Sure, it'd be easier to do anything else right now,
but that's not how you realize your dreams, that's not how you achieve goals.

When I quit my job to pursue a vision fulltime, with months of leeway ahead of
me, this is not how I envisioned it would turn out. But if everything always
went according to plan, life would also get predictably boring. Goals are only
worthy if there's elements of risk, uncertainty and doubt associated to them.

What this means is unless these elements are present, you have not left your
comfort zone, and therefore aren't growing into your full potential. Growth, in
a way, is deciding to leave the ordinary world and going on a journey towards
the extraordinary world. Discipline is the will to persist until a breakthrough.

At this point, you're the fledgling freshly thrown out of the nest, falling
towards the ground at the speed of gravity. You have this moment to learn how to
fly. The past and the future disappear into a blur, you're living here and now.

As scary as it sounds, it's an inevitable feeling when doing something new.
Better embrace it, accept this is the way things are, and give it your best.

But, how do you know you're performing at your best? How do you know whether
you're on the right path? And how does personal growth relate to all of this?

This is when the next lesson comes in.

* Feedback Cycles

Unlike the fledgling of the previous section, you have more than a quick moment
to make it work. This is an advantage, if you learn to leverage its potential.

Imagine you have a school exam or a business report due next month. Do you wait
until the day before the deadline to get started? Or do you start right now and
see how much you can improve towards it every day? The choice seems obvious.

And yet, I'll admit I used to be in the first camp. School, from its habit of
testing knowledge more than validating understanding, makes it easy to cheat and
cram your mind with all the relevant data the night before an exam and succeed.

"This is boring, I'll skip class and go learn to code at home instead." This
line of thought will teach you how programming works, certainly, but it won't
teach you how to grow a business even if its main activity involves software.

And this is a terrible habit to develop. Because it becomes cursed the second
you leave school. There's a reason why students often learn the most valuable
lessons during internships instead of the years of study leading to them. The
bar for quality, performance and achievemnt gets raised so much, it makes the
school look like playing a video game on easy mode.

"Now the real Dark Souls begins." As they say. The true challenge starts now.

The higher up the ladder you work yourself to, the harsher the challenges get.

This is something I didn't fully realize until starting a business. Because now
there's not a backlog of tasks to do ready and waiting for me to attack every
day. Turns out deciding what to work on is harder than doing the work itself.

Throwing weeks of work away feels worse when you also planned said work.

On the bright side, there's a method you can learn and apply to simplify this.

There are three main activities in a startup, at least when it comes to value
innovation. That is, creating the product or service to solve a problem your
customers are having, while finding product-market fit making it profitable.

The lesson here is the quicker you can validate what you're developing against
customer feedback, the faster you can realign your aim towards your goals.

You need a strong set of metrics to inform your decisions, which means at every
step in the building process, you're having a second process of gathering
measurements and a third process of analyzing them into learning lessons.

How do you know you're measuring the right metrics? You put the product, even if
it's incomplete, buggy, and slow, in front of potential customers. Their
reactions will inform you better than assumptions and suppositions ever could.
If they ask for features you already have planned, then you know you're on the
right track. If they ask questions about what they're seeing, you have valuable
information on what to simplify, and what to prioritize for the next cycle.

It can save you months of work going down a path nobody ends up using.

It allows you to concentrate your efforts on what the market finds valuable.

It helps you introduce "never seen before" innovations with the right approach.

In essence, you are crossing the chasm from having a concept in your mind, and
understanding how to build a bridge, brick by brick, so users see the potential.

Imagine you're training as an archer, there's the apple sitting on a tree at a
hundred yards from you. You feel the wind, the tension on the bow, your breath
becomes louder as you focus. You have one hour of practice scheduled, what do
you do next? Are you waiting until you have perfect aim before making a shot, or
are you taking hundreds of shots? Which do you think yields the best results?

Put another way, first you ready your bow, then you fire an arrow, and next you
adjust your aim for the next shot. Doing so in a loop, on repeat, until your
instructor comes back to ask "how does that feel?" and gives you the next hint.

It's one thing to gather knowledge in isolation, and another to validate this
knowledge against reality in order to transmute experience into understanding.

This is the next lesson.

* Learning by Doing

I know it's hard to begin developing a new skill, a new talent. It's comforting
to tell yourself some people have it while others don't. But this ignores an
important element of mastery; the hard work and the long hours those we consider
to be naturally gifted had to put behind their craft to constantly level it up.

This can lead to consuming more content on how to get started than on starting.

YouTube videos, blogs, tutorials, books: the content to consume is everywhere.
The will to sit down and start, planning time blocks every day consistently over
an extended period of time, where extended means at least 30 days, is rarer. So
rare, you'd consider it an unfair advantage when realizing how rare doing it is.

This works not only for the main activity of your business, or your craft. But
also to any complementary skill you can imagine. The secret here is that these
skills compound over time, as you find your own unique ways to synergize them
and combine one skill into another to create something only you can do.

Take blogging, for example, I enjoy writing and sharing, but I was also afraid
of putting my words and ideas out there. I did it in the past, but without the
consistency needed to get to a point where it feels comfortable and easier. I'm
sure you can relate with one or more skill you've tried in your own life.

Recently, I committed myself to record one video on camera, every day. You'd be
laughing to see me pace around the apartment on the first day, trying to find
every reason to delay the inevitable. "I could eat first, and do the dishes,
then watch only one Stargate episode, and then read one chapter, and then I'll
do it, for sure."

Sounds familiar? If I had succumbed to these thoughts, I would still have the
fear. The thing with fear is, if you avoid it, it only gets worse and grows
bigger until you change your decision to not doing it after all. While on the
other hand, if you decide to feel the fear and do it anyways, it goes away.

You have to accept it's going to suck, but also that it's only temporary. You
were able to learn to walk and talk as a kid, how often did you fail doing it?

Why should learning new skills feel any different? Well, as adults we developed
a conscience with a nasty habit of trying to talk us away from change. The
moment you decide to do something new, something different, a voice pops up in
your mind telling you about all the things you're currently good at.

All the things you could be doing instead. Don't listen to that voice.

The lesson here is that while starting is hard, it's also the hardest. This
means as you sit down to do the thing you decided to do, no matter how
uncomfortable it feels, you can rest assured it will get better and easier.

You don't try to push that voice away, because this only creates more chatter in
your mind. Instead, you ignore it, get to work, and understand it will get
replaced, in time, as you make progress. Before you know it, the voice in your
head is congratulating you, feeling good about itself and looking forward to
doing it again.

And you know what? I no longer feel the fear of getting in front of a camera.
Now I have yet to publish any content in video form, but that will be coming.
The point is, what initially were hours of getting ready is now mere seconds.

However, as you're doing the work, you may notice distractions here and there.
They try to steal your focus by pulling it towards any other element inside your
environment. This is another problem worth solving.

This is what we're talking about next.

* Focus on One Thing

Ever had your mind racing in all directions at once? I know the feeling.

I've learned this means the goals we set aren't defined with enough clarity.
What helps, more than anything else, is to write down your goals. Having them
outside of your mind while you're able to directly observe them adds focus.
If writing your goals is hard, it means working on them is even harder.

Writing it down allows you to get used to the idea. To reflect back on it.

Try shooting an arrow with a blindfold on, you're guaranteed to miss. If you can't
see the goal, how are you going to tell if you're aiming in the right direction?

The ideal goals to set are the long term ones, because they act as a compass you
can use to align every shorter term goal you have and decisions you make. The
more your long term goals scares you, the better. It means you're after
something worthwhile, a destiny where you'll have to grow to be worthy of it.

Remember that everything surrounding us once started as an idea, no matter how
crazy it sounds. The invention of cars, skyscrapers, computers, mobile devices,
and anything manmade you can think of was once only a thought. The seed of an
idea inside the mind of someone with enough commitment grows into realization.

Don't be afraid to dream big and act boldly.

As you commit yourself towards a goal, you'll find yourself prioritizing tasks
over smaller time periods in the years, months, weeks and even for every day.

This is where distractions come into play, they're a constant reminder you could
be doing something else with your time. Things you already know the outcome of.

The reason for this is because going after your goal involves an element of the
unknown. It comes with fear, uncertainty and doubt. But this is natural; you've
never done it before. If it was common, then the rewards wouldn't be worth it.

Our environments are influencing us more than we'd like to admit. You have to
learn to say "NO" to everything except the plans you commit yourself to. Within
reason, of course. It's good to have unfocused time, periods where you allow for
serendipities to enter your mind, periods where you find the balance between
pushing yourself and recovering your strength.

Environment is not just the objects surrounding us, but also the people we
associate with. Environment is anything able to excerpt an influence on you.
Knowing this, you can then use it to your advantage by creating an environment
whose influence on you pushes you towards achieving your goals, lifing you up.

This lesson is maybe the hardest one to apply, but also the one with the biggest
payoff. Here's some techniques I learned to use for myself.

First, realize when you're affected by distractions. Notice your mind wandering
away. It can be tempting to put yourself down in these times, but doing the
opposite is more valuable. As you notice your distractions, you're able to label
them and see an improvement in how quickly you notice and act over them.

The way to act on distractions is to classify them, write them down so they're
now outside your mind, tell yourself you'll come back to it later, and refocus
on work. The more you do this, the easier and faster the process becomes, until
you can spend hours in deeply focused work each day. As a bonus, by the time you
come back to your notes, the interest for the distraction often fades away.

Put your phone away. Put it on silent mode and throw it in another room, at
least keep it out of reach where you have to get up to go get it. We often
underestimate how much focus the thought of checking for notifications takes.

Get a timer running, not one counting down but instead one counting up. This is
because while you associate goals with a deadline, you associate improvements in
focus with improving. That is, doing better than the last time. A timer counting
down limits you to doing as good as the last time. You want to push the limits.

Say you begin small and decide you're going to work out 5 minutes each day. It
might not seem much to someone already working out every day, but if you're just
starting out it's a lot more encouraging than facing a full hour 5 times a week.

Your goal, then, is to reach 5 minutes, and to be extra-ordinary you only have
to keep going afterwards. Remember that ordinary is the way you're used to do
things, so anything pushing past that is extra-ordinary. You'll see how you have
the ability to summon an extra minute of efforts, it's almost magical.

Soon your 5 minutes is pushing to 10, and then it's pushing to 20, and by the
time you reach 30 minutes it starts feeling good. You're even looking forward to
doing it, and the thought of not doing it feels like a part of you is missing.

You also want to keep track of your daily progress. First, because what you
measure is also what you improve, as you've seen from feedback cycles. Second,
because when you see a streak on the calendar, the need to continue the streak
overpowers the desire to skip one day.

Put this progression in a place that's highly visible. I use a whiteboard.

Think of it as running quests inside a video game. How often do you check your
quest log? Some games even go as far as keeping tracking indicators on screen.

If you can do it in a virtual world, you can certainly do it in the real one.

Related to focus, the amount of content you consume also affects your ability to
concentrate on one thing for extended periods of time. Next we'll see how to
re-frame your mindset with the benefits of practicing only one thing at a time.

* Information Overload

Do you ever feel like you're running with a mind fog? You're learning knowledge
but find it hard to transform it into understanding, to make it your own.

You could be consuming more content than you are producing. It happened to me.

But consuming content is like having your own personal army of mentors, you say.
Sure, I understand the feeling almost too well, and also how it can be a doubly
edged sword. In the absence of a mentor as a person, we fall back to content.

But there's a world of difference between consuming content, and having a coach
who can see, with clarity, what is the one thing you can improve next to the
greatest benefit.

A good teacher gives you knowledge, but a great teacher gives you understanding.

Coincidentally, this is also the definition of a great manager. They don't do
the work for you, but instead help you improve at doing it the best you can.

Imagine you're learning to play the guitar, or the piano, or how to improve your
golf swing. Now as your coach I watch you for 5 minutes, then spend 20 minutes
explaining everything you're doing wrong and the things you must do to improve.

How are you feeling? Overwhelmed, right?

Instead of developing confidence over one aspect of the craft, you're now asking
yourself dozens of questions about the whole.

"Am I playing this note right?"

"What are people thinking of this melody?"

"Oh no, I missed a note, I'm doomed!"

"Focus on the ball, make sure to distribute your weight, swing from the waist ..."

This is what information overload feels like.

Too much knowledge, not enough time to practice each part of it individually.

Unfortunately, we've also optimized computers to enhance this experience. We
even named the industry after this: Information (Overload) Technologies.

What you want is a coach who gives you one piece of knowledge, then goes away
while you practice that one thing over and over, hundreds of times.

Ever seen a kid practice basketball? They look as if they're bouncing the ball
up and down without doing much else, and from a distance it does look boring.

But if you were to go inside their minds, you'd see it racing with feedback.

Bounce 10. "Less pressure on the hand."

Bounce 20. "Relax the hand, use the wrist more."

Bounce 30. "Use the elbow to make the wrist stronger."

Bounce 50. "Begin at the shoulder to focus more energy."

Bounce 10000. Now everyone else thinks you're naturally talented.

That's one piece of knowledge, bouncing a ball, with iterations of mastery.

This is what understanding feels like. You can't communicate it using words.

This lesson is about finding a balance between consuming and producing. At one
point, nothing beats sitting down and practice a skill by yourself, in solitude.

It's important if you're working towards achieving a long-term goal. Because it
provides the growth necessary to grow into the person able to realize the goal.

Consuming less helps you focus on doing one thing at a time.

Consuming less helps gives you time to produce more, and learn by doing.

Consuming less helps you measure what you're doing, and getting feedback from it.

Consuming less helps you develop discipline, to keep going when things get though.

* Doing Something Different

Sooner or later, by applying these lessons, you're finding your life's purpose.

There's no manual, no content, no nothing on how to do it. Imagine inventing
cars when everyone is using horses as a commodity. How do you explain to them
how the idea of cars is better? You don't. You build a prototype and show it.

This is a crucial lesson. There's immense value in providing value to others.
But to get there, you have to communicate it with clarity to your customers.

The best way to communicate an idea is not to explain it, it's to show it. Then
you can explain it by answering questions and leading your customers along the
journey from where they are now to the point where their problem get solved.

Easier said than done.

Remember the feedback cycle? This is what I want to improve as a business.

Everything we do involves feedback loops. I want software which empowers this.

I have a plan, in my head, on how to solve this. It's been growing for decades
now, and I'm beginning to understand how to turn it into a viable product.

Every day, I'm seeing more evidence there's a market for my research. Now I'm
applying the lessons I shared while working on a prototype to show a solution.

[[./assets/formats-from-70s.png]]

* Conclusion

In sharing these lessons I've learned along the way, I hope I can make you save
time and help you learn them faster than I did.

If I can encourage one person to follow their dreams, then this is a success.

If you enjoyed this entry, you can also help me to keep going:

Share this with your friends if you think they'll benefit from it.

Follow me on Twitter [[https://twitter.com/Lambda_Coder][@Lambda_Coder]], where you can interact with me.

Donate on Paypal to [[https://www.paypal.com/donate/?business=SWZC7AZVNDUY8&no_recurring=0&item_name=Researching+a+brand+new+approach+to+software+development+and+application+usage.+And+sharing+the+lessons+learned+along+the+way.&currency_code=CAD][jeremiep@gmail.com]], where you can keep me alive.
